Adding spec for Date/TimePicker design updates (#4490)
microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml: specs/DateTimePicker-Visual-Updates-Spec.md

    </Grid>
```

> Todo: add a reflection example (classic use of VisualBrush in WPF)

### MonochromaticOverlayPresenter theme resources

You can modify the default Style and ControlTemplate to give the control a unique appearance. 
For more info, see the 
[Light-weight styling section](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/xaml-styles#lightweight-styling)
of the 
[Styling controls](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/xaml-styles)
article.

`MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` defines the following new resource:

```xml
<StaticResource x:Key="DatePickerFlyoutPresenterHighlightForegroundColor" ResourceKey="TextOnAccentAAFillColorPrimary" />
```

## Other MonochromaticOverlayPresenter members

| Name | Description |
| - | - |
| SourceElement | Gets or sets the UIElement to render inside the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`. |
| ReplacementColor | Gets or sets the Color to use instead of the non-transparent pixels of the SourceElement.

# API Details

```csharp
namespace Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls.Primitives
{

[MUX_PROPERTY_CHANGED_CALLBACK(TRUE)]
[MUX_PROPERTY_CHANGED_CALLBACK_METHODNAME("OnPropertyChanged")]

> unsealed runtimeclass MonochromaticOverlayPresenter : Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.FrameworkElement

Reviewer: we currently inherit from Grid for this class, as we use the Background and CornerRadius properties that don't exist in FrameworkElement or Panel (Background exists but CornerRadius doesn't)

Reviewer 2: @MikeHillberg Are there other types that would be better to derive from? I think Control wouldn't work because Control only has the properties, it doesn't do the drawing.

Reviewer 3: The implementation can derive from Grid, we just don't need/want the public API to have extra unnecessary members.

MonochromaticOverlayPresenter
===

# Background

> The `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` API in this spec is a Xaml Framework Element that lets you "draw" its background by
> pointing at another element; the rendering of that other element becomes the background of
> the Grid.

Reviewer 4: I think we should remove the notion of "background" since we got rid of the content, so the whole background vs content issue is moot. Talking too much about "background" makes you think that this is about custom backgrounds, when really it's about re-rendering another element.

```suggestion
The `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` API is a Xaml Framework Element that renders the portion of another element at the same position (typically beneath it in the Z-order), while also applying a monochromatic colorization effect. This allows the element to appear to be an overlay on top of the other element.
```

`MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` element is similar to several precedents:
* [SwapChainBackgroundPanel](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.SwapChainBackgroundPanel),
which is a `Grid` that renders its background using a swap chain.
* [CompositionMaskBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Composition.CompositionMaskBrush),
which  is a brush that gets its content from another (source) brush.
* WPF's [VisualBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/System.Windows.Media.VisualBrush),
which uses an element's rendering to draw a brush.

`MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` is most similar to the WPF `VisualBrush`, the difference being that `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`
is an element rather than a Brush. So it can't for example be rendered as text foreground.

This new `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` will be used in the rendering of the 
[DatePicker](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.DatePicker)
control.

# API Pages

## MonochromaticOverlayPresenter class

> A [Framework Element](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/winui/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.frameworkelement?view=winui-3.0-preview)
> whose background can be the rendering of another element, or using another element
> as a mask.

Reviewer 4: If you accept my previous remarks, then this becomes

```suggestion
A [Framework Element](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/winui/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.frameworkelement?view=winui-3.0-preview)
which renders another element at the same position (typically beneath it in the Z-order), while also applying a monochromatic colorization effect.
```

```csharp
public class MonochromaticOverlayPresenter : FrameworkElement
{
    public UIElement SourceElement { get; set; }
    public Color ReplacementColor { get; set; }
}
```

> Set the `SourceElement` property to indicate which element's rendering should be drawn as the background of the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`. If the `Background` property is set, the SourceElement's rendering is on top of it. (The source is z-ordered on top of the background.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Set the `SourceElement` property to indicate which element should be rendered as the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`. The `SourceElement`'s rendering takes place on top of the `Background`, if a background is set.

The portion of the `SourceElement` rendered inside the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` is the portion that would be rendered at the same location as the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`. The `SourceElement` is typically placed below the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` in the Z-order, giving the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` the appearance of an overlay.
```

Only the source element's rendering applies to the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`; the user

> cannot interact with it using the mouse, or move keyboard focus to it. However, `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` will bring in system focus visuals, regardless of what the [UseSystemFocusVisuals](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.Control.UseSystemFocusVisuals) property is set to. To avoid this, you should inset the margins to remove it.

Reviewer 4: "bring in" is a big jargony. Perhaps

```suggestion
cannot interact with it using the mouse, or move keyboard focus to it. However, `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` will render system focus visuals, regardless of what the [UseSystemFocusVisuals](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.Control.UseSystemFocusVisuals) property is set to. To avoid this, you should inset the margins to remove it.
```

But even with that remark, I still am not sure what this is saying. Is it that it will render *its own* system focus visuals? Or that it will render system focus visuals of the source element? And whose margins should I inset? The MonochromaticOverlayPresenter or the SourceElement?

Author: My understanding is that it will render system focus visuals on itself, and you should inset the margins of the MonochromaticOverlayPresenter. @jevansaks is that correct?

> Note: the element set as the `SourceElement` cannot be an ancestor or in the descendancy of the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`. However the `SourceElement` must be in the same XAML tree as the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`.

> If the `ReplacementColor` property is set, the `SourceElement` is treated as a mask; every non-transparent pixel will be replaced by this color. The source pixel is replaced when the Alpha value of the `ReplacementColor` is non-zero. The RGB value of the `ReplacementColor` (not the Alpha value) will overwrite the RGB of the source. The default value for `ReplacementColor` is Transparent.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the `ReplacementColor` property is set and has a nonzero Alpha value, then the `SourceElement` is treated as a mask: every non-transparent pixel will be replaced by this color. The RGB value of the `ReplacementColor` (not the Alpha value) will overwrite the RGB of the source. The default value for `ReplacementColor` is Transparent.
```

### MonochromaticOverlayPresenter examples

The following example puts an `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` on top of (z-ordered above)
some scrolling text, causing the center of the text to be highlighted, even as it's scrolling.
Things to note:
* The `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` is sourcing from the `TextBlock`, it's also z-ordered above
the same `TextBlock`. If the `Background` and `SourceElement` properties weren't set,
it would have no effect; it would render the `TextBlock` exactly on top of itself.
* The 'Background` property is black, and the `ReplacementColor` is green, causing
the overlay text to be displayed as green on black.
* The `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` is positioned and given a height such that it's a black band

> across the center of the scrolling text.

Reviewer 4: Its `IsHitTestVisible` property is set to `False` so that input still goes to the `ScrollViewer` that is z-ordered behind it.

```xml
<Grid Background="White" Width="150">
    <ScrollViewer x:Name="Target" Height="300">
        <TextBlock
            Foreground="Black"
            FontSize="30"
            Text="{x:Bind LoremIpsum}"
            TextWrapping="Wrap">
        </TextBlock>
    </ScrollViewer>

    <MonochromaticOverlayPresenter
        ReplacementColor="Green"
        Background="Black"
        TargetElement="{Binding ElementName=Target}"

>         Height="30"

Reviewer 4: ```xml
    IsHitTestVisible="False"
```

                <MonochromaticOverlayPresenter
                    ReplacementColor="Black"
                    TargetElement="{Binding ElementName=Target}"
                    Width="50"
                    VerticalAlignment="Stretch"
                    HorizontalAlignment="Center"
                    Background="LightBlue"/>
            </Grid>
        </StackPanel>
    </Grid>
```

> Todo: add a reflection example (classic use of VisualBrush in WPF)

### MonochromaticOverlayPresenter theme resources

You can modify the default Style and ControlTemplate to give the control a unique appearance. 
For more info, see the 
[Light-weight styling section](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/xaml-styles#lightweight-styling)
of the 
[Styling controls](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/xaml-styles)
article.

`MonochromaticOverlayPresenter` defines the following new resource:

```xml
<StaticResource x:Key="DatePickerFlyoutPresenterHighlightForegroundColor" ResourceKey="TextOnAccentAAFillColorPrimary" />
```

## Other MonochromaticOverlayPresenter members

| Name | Description |
| - | - |

> | SourceElement | Gets or sets the UIElement to apply the color effect to. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| SourceElement | Gets or sets the UIElement to render inside the `MonochromaticOverlayPresenter`. |
```

ElementBackgroundGrid
===

# Background

> The `ElementBackgroundGrid` API in this spec is a Xaml Grid that lets you "draw" its background by

Reviewer 2: I understand the derivation of this suggested name but off the cuff the name makes it seem way more interesting than it is. It is a very purpose-built primitive that I don't expect to see much other use for, so I would like to give it a name that makes it seem less attractive. As-is (without reading this description) it makes it sound like something I might want to use as the background-most Grid for any Element (i.e. Control) I might be wanting to build.

I'm not saying the name I originally gave it was better, but I would hope that we could make the name less generic-sounding to make it sound a little less generally useful.

This description and name also omits the ColorEffect operation that the primitive performs, which is a key aspect to its purpose-built nature.

Reviewer 5: Why not make it a more "interesting" control for others to use.  There is talk about a ButtonGroup/SegmentedControl where I suggested this primitive control be used for that control.
https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml/issues/2310#issuecomment-799954635

Reviewer 4: I think the current name is too misleading. The name and description made me think it did something completely different from what it actually does. (This confusion will become evident in some of my comments.)

Reviewer 3: Discussion: Does this need to be a Grid? Border is sealed. Does it need any child(ren) though? We could potentially derive from FE.

This *only* works where it overlaps the source element. This really is only to be used as an overlay. This is a primitive that's only designed to be used as part of a control template. If we want at some point we could create a general-purpose control that uses this in its control template.

Colorizier/Monochromizer?
[BitmapIcon.ShowAsMonochromeProperty](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.BitmapIcon.ShowAsMonochromeProperty)

**Naming:**
Overlay is nice
ElementBackground is nice?
Presenter is nice
OverlayElementBackgroundPresenter
ElementBackgroundOverlayPresenter
OverlayEffectPresenter
ElementOverlayMonochromePresenter (Source, ReplacementColor)
Colorizer/Monochromizer
ElementMonochromeOverlayPresenter
MonochromaticOverlayPresenter

Recommend:
Primitives namespace
MonochromaticOverlayPresenter : FrameworkElement

which is a `Grid` that renders its background using a swap chain.
* [CompositionMaskBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Composition.CompositionMaskBrush),
which  is a brush that gets its content from another (source) brush.
* WPF's [VisualBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/System.Windows.Media.VisualBrush),
which uses an element's rendering to draw a brush.

`ElementBackgroundGrid` is most similar to the WPF `VisualBrush`, the difference being that `ElementBackgroundGrid`
is an element rather than a Brush. So it can't for example be rendered as text foreground.

This new `ElementBackgroundGrid` will be used in the rendering of the 
[DatePicker](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.DatePicker)
control.

# API Pages

## ElementBackgroundGrid class

A [Grid](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.Grid)
whose background can be the rendering of another element, or using another element
as a mask.

```csharp
public class ElementBackgroundGrid : Grid
{
    public UIElement SourceElement { get; set; }
    public Color ReplacementColor { get; set; }
}
```

> Set the `SourceElement` property to indicate which element's rendering should be drawn

Reviewer 3: Maybe it should be `ElementSource`, aligning with UriSource, IconSource, ImageSource, AcrylicBrush.BackgroundSource

> Set the `SourceElement` property to indicate which element's rendering should be drawn

Reviewer 3: Discussion:

Other examples:
[CompositionVisualSurface.SourceVisual](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Composition.CompositionVisualSurface.SourceVisual)
(and SourceOffset, SourceSize)

ElementSource
BackgroundSource

What if in the future we have something like a SourceOffset (Rect) property? If so, then we'd like SourceElement to align with it. (SourceElementOffset)

If we get rid of Content/Children (see earlier content), then we don't have a Background property/concept to cause confusion.

Stick with SourceElement.

as the background of the `ElementBackgroundGrid`. If the `Background` property is set, it

> is rendered on top of the `SourceElement's` rendering.

Reviewer 2: I believe this description is backwards, though i'm confused by the phrase "SourceElement's Rendering" -- are we talking about the rendering done by ElementBackgroundGrid? If so, then it goes: Background (bottom most), SourceElement (with color modifications), Children (on top).

Reviewer 3: "If the `Background` property is set, the `SourceElement's` rendering is on top of it. (The source is z-ordered on top of the background.)"

Reviewer 3: Recommend: fix

Only the source element's rendering applies to the `ElementBackgroundGrid`; the user
cannot interact with it using the mouse, or move keyboard focus to it.

> Note: the element set as the `SourceElement` cannot be an ancestor or in the
descendancy of the `ElementBackgroundGrid`.

> > Issue: are there other restrictions? Is there an underlying Comp page that this can point to?

Reviewer 3: Note the focus question might depend on [Control.UseSystemFocusVisuals](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.Control.UseSystemFocusVisuals).

> > Issue: are there other restrictions? Is there an underlying Comp page that this can point to?

Reviewer 3: Discussion: Yes, it will bring in the focus visual, regardless of UseSystemFocusVisuals.

To avoid this, the user of this control should inset the margins to remove it.

Recommend: 
* Add: Yes, they have to share an ancestor.
* Add: recommendation about how to avoid the focus visuals

> If the `ReplacementColor` property is set, the `SourceElement` is treated as a mask;

Reviewer 3: Null?

> If the `ReplacementColor` property is set, the `SourceElement` is treated as a mask;

Reviewer 3: Discussion:
Default value is Transparent (can't be null as Color is a value type).

> every non-transparent pixel will be replaced by this color.

Reviewer 3: Discussion: The source pixel is replaced when the replacement color's A is non-zero. Then replacement's RGB (no A) will overwrite the RGB of the source.

Recommend: explain this

> every non-transparent pixel will be replaced by this color.

Reviewer 3: Discussion: see above

> 

Reviewer 3: Discussion: see above. The missing piece was that this is truly an overlay control, not a portal or viewport.

You can still apply render transforms (apply after the source has been rendered into the overlay element).

The image below shows another use of the `ElementBackgroundGrid` API, where it manipulates the colors of an element on screen where the contents of that element are moving. Here, the control is overlaid on a ScrollViewer that has a fixed position but moving content. 

### ElementBackgroundGrid examples

The following example puts an `ElementBackgroundGrid` on top of (z-ordered above)

> some scrolling text, causing the center of the text to be highlighted, even as it's scrolling.

Reviewer 3: That's one use, but not the required use

Things to note:
* The `ElementBackgroundGrid` is sourcing from the `TextBlock`, it's also z-ordered above
the same `TextBlock`. If the `Background` and `SourceElement` properties weren't set,
it would have no effect; it would render the `TextBlock` exactly on top of itself.
* The 'Background` property is black, and the `ReplacementColor` is green, causing
the overlay text to be displayed as green on black.
* The `ElementBackgroundGrid` is positioned and given a height such that it's a black band

> across the center of the scrolling text.

Reviewer 3: Added text in a couple of places explaining that to still get input to the source, you need to set IsHitTestVisible to false on the overlay.

```xml
<Grid Background="White" Width="150">
    <ScrollViewer x:Name="Target" Height="300">
        <TextBlock
            Foreground="Black"
            FontSize="30"
            Text="{x:Bind LoremIpsum}"
            TextWrapping="Wrap">
        </TextBlock>
    </ScrollViewer>

>     <ElementBackgroundGrid

Reviewer 3: Recommend: Need to set IsHitTestVisible=false

        ReplacementColor="Green"
        Background="Black"

>         TargetElement="{Binding ElementName=Target}"

Reviewer 3: Sorry, renaming omission

        Height="30"
        VerticalAlignment="Center"
        HorizontalAlignment="Stretch"/>
</Grid>
```

> ![Example showing the ColorFilterOverlay control overlaid on moving content within a ScrollViewer, changing the foreground color and background color of words that pass through.](images/api-example.gif)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
![Example showing the ElementBackgroundGrid control overlaid on moving content within a ScrollViewer, changing the foreground color and background color of words that pass through.](images/api-example.gif)
```

The example below shows how the new `ColorFilterOverlayControl` API can be used to partially highlight a TextBlock.

```xml
 <Grid Background="{ThemeResource ApplicationPageBackgroundThemeBrush}">
        <StackPanel x:Name="Panel" Orientation="Vertical" HorizontalAlignment="Center" VerticalAlignment="Center">
            <Grid Margin="2,10,0,0">
                <TextBlock x:Name="Target" Text="This string will be partially highlighted"/>
                <ColorFilterOverlayControl
                    ReplacementColor="Black"
                    TargetElement="{Binding ElementName=Target}"
                    Width="50"
                    VerticalAlignment="Stretch"
                    HorizontalAlignment="Center"
                    Background="LightBlue"/>
            </Grid>
        </StackPanel>
    </Grid>
```

> > Todo: add a reflection example (classic use of VisualBrush in WPF)

Reviewer 2: We don't have enough knobs to do this with the element as provided. In order to do that you would need to have the SourceRect / SourceOffset be available so that this can render offset from the original content. I mean ... ok I guess it would be possible with post-layout transforms, so maybe if you set RenderTransform on it you could do it? But I feel it would be somewhat unnatural.

Reviewer 3: It's a standard use case of VisualBrush in WPF, it would be odd to suggest that you can't do the same thing in WinUI.

![Reflection](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18429489/111696178-3ae6bb80-87f1-11eb-882a-90e7f2b92e2d.png)

Examples of this include the DatePicker and TimePicker controls. While the corners of the controls themselves are rounded, the selection rectangle within the control is still squared off. Buttons and other areas inside these controls are also still squared off, making them look dated when placed alongside other controls that are more modernly designed, such as 
[NavigationView](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/navigationview).

Recently, [ListView was given design updates](https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml-specs/blob/user/anawish/ListViewGridViewDesignUpdates/active/ListViewGridView/listviewgridview-designupdates.md) to round the corners of its items. DatePicker and TimePicker should follow in these footsteps, and make sure that they adopt any of the ListView design elements that are relevant. This includes general rounding of selection visuals, as well as rounded grey backplates for items that get hovered. 

This spec will detail a number of changes to update the designs of DatePicker and TimePicker so that they are more 

> visually aligned with modern WinUI controls. At a high level, some key parts of these updated styles are: a rounded selection rectangle; rounded backplates on items, buttons, and scroll buttons on  hover; and new animations that are aligned with other controls. 

Reviewer 4: We'll have to address the input-eating problem before this will be viable.

Reviewer 3: Added an explanation of turning off hit-testing to a couple of places in the text.
